% ParOSol User's Guide
% Cyril Flaig
% 18. January 2012

# Name #

ParOSol


# Synopsis #

    parosol [options] input-file 


# Description #

ParOSol is a fully-parallel micro-FE analysis code based on Octree to
solve linear elasticity problems. ParOSol solves the problem direct on
3D images, which can be obtained by CT-scans. It can be run on desktop
machine but also on cluster.


# Using ParOSol #

If no option are given ParOSol solves to a tolerance of 1e–6 and uses in
maximum 7 levels. A input have to be given. ParOSol writes the result back
into the input file.

    parosol --level 3 --tol 1e-4 simple.h5 

This solves the elasticity equation on mesh given in the file
`simple.h5`. It uses maximal 3 multigrid levels and solves to a relative
residual of 1e–4.


# Converting this document #

The [markdown syntax](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown) is used in
this user's guide. It can be translated into HTML or into other format
with [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/). For conversion into 
HTML use following command:

    pandoc -r markdown -t html -o userguide.html -c parosol.css \
           -S -N -s --toc userguide.mkd

Converting to LaTeX:

    pandoc -r markdown -t latex -o userguide.tex --template=parosol.tex \
           -S -N -s --toc userguide.mkd


# Getting the source code #

The source code is available at [bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/cflaig/parosol/overview)
or clone it with:

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/cflaig/parosol

If the source tree is downloaded it consists of the following directories:

* `build` directory to build ParOSol. It includes a sample configuration file
* `doc` holds the user's guide
* `src` holds all source code
* `tools` includes some non documented helper tools for generating meshes.

When extracting the file `mesh.tar.bz2` a directory will show up that
includes some example meshes.


# Building and running ParOSol #

This section describes how to build ParOSol from source and running an
example mesh.


## Dependencies ##

ParOSol has minimal dependencies on other libraries. This simplifies
the installation process. To build it
[HDF5 library 1.8](http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/) and [eigen
v2](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page) has to be
installed. A MPI-compiler has to be used. OpenMPI and MPICH2 are
supported.


## Compiling ParOSol ##

If all libraries are installed from the Linux distribution, ParOSol can
be build in following way:

    cd build/
    ./do_configure
    make

The MPI compiler can be set with the following variable:

    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER:FILEPATH=mpic++

If HDF5 is not installed in the standard library path then set following
variables:

    HDF5_LIBRARIES:PATH=
    HDF5_INCLUDE_DIRS:PATH=

Eigen is a pure template library. This means the library consists only of
header files. This can be easily included by the header path switch (-I
for _GCC_ ). If eigen v2 is installed do `/path/toeigen/eigen2/Eigen` set
following variable:

    CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS:STRING=-I/path/toeigen

In the directory `build/` is a sample configure script called
`do_configure.sh`. The script can run with following commands:

    cd build
    ./do_configure.sh

Instead using the `do_configure.sh` script, **cmake** can be called
directly. If the **HDF5** library is installed at `/path/to/hdf5/`
following command should be used to configure ParOSol:

    cmake \
        -D CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER:FILEPATH=mpic++ \
        -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE:STRING=RelWithDebInfo \
        -D HDF5_LIBRARIES:PATH=/path/to/hdf5/lib/libhdf5.so\
        -D HDF5_INCLUDE_DIRS:PATH=/path/to/hdf5/include \
        ../src

After running the configure script, ParOSol can be built by running the
following command:

    make

Now, the software is built in the `build/` directory.


## Running a simple mesh ##

In the main directory of ParOSol there is a tarball with sample meshes.
Extract it with:

    tar xjvf mesh.tar.bz2

Now change the directory:

    cd build/

The following command starts the simulation:

    mpirun -np 4 ./parosol --level 4 --tol 1e-7 ../mesh/h5/sphere.h5

ParOSol is started with four processes. This is suited for a computer with
four cores. At most four level are used in the multigrid preconditioner and
the solving tolerance is set to 1e–7. For huger input mesh more level
should be used. The results is written back into the original mesh.


## Viewing the results ##

ParOSol ships some helper tools in the directory `tools`. There is also a
script `createxmf.py` that generates a xmf file. The xmf file describes
how to read the h5 mesh file. It is important that the tool is executed
from the place where the meshes are stored.

    cd mesh/h5
    ../../tools/createxmf.py sphere.h5

The new generated file can be open with [Paraview](http://paraview.org)


# Building the source code documentation #

The source code of ParOSol is documented with
[Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.org). The creation of the documentation is
included in the build system. If Doxygen is installed and found by
cmake you can run following command to build the documentation:

    make docu


# File format #

ParOSol reads and writes into the same file. Thus the file consists of
a input and output part. Because HDF5 is used the file is organized in
datasets and group of datasets.


## Data types involved ##

The HDF5 library handles the correct endianness of the hardware. The Table
below shows the data types used in the I/O operation. Because most
of the computers uses the little endian format, a `double` is interpretedi
in little endian. 

`H5T_IEEE_F32LE` has to be read as IEEE floating point number single
precision and little endian.

The table gives an overview on the used formats

  native      hdf5 type
  ---------   -------------------
  `float`     `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
  `double`    `H5T_IEEE_F64LE`
  `short`     `H5T_STD_U16LE`
  `long`      `H5T_STD_I64LE`


## Input file format ##

ParOSol reads all needed data from the dataset group `Image_Data`.
This group must contain following datasets:

-   `Image`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
    -   Size: (x,y,z)
    -   Description: Holds the 3D image of size x,y,z. The values are the
        Young’s modulus in GPa.

-   `Voxelsize`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F64LE`
    -   Size: scalar
    -   Description: Size of the voxels

-   `Poison_ratio`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F64LE`
    -   Size: scalar
    -   Description: The Poison’s ratio of the material `[0,50)`.
        Remark: Poison’s ratio is constant over the whole image.

-   `Fixed_Displacement_Coordinates`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_U16LE`
    -   Size: (n, 4)
    -   Description: This datasets describes the boundary condition. The
        first 3 values are the coordinate of the boundary nodes. The
        fourth value describes the direction in which the node is fixed
        (`0 = x`, `1 = y`, `2 = z`).

-   `Fixed_Displacement_Values`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
    -   Size: n
    -   Description: This dataset holds the displacements of the boundary
        condition. `Fixed_Displacement_Coordinates` indicates the position
        and the direction of the nodes and this dataset saves theirs
        displacements. This dataset must have the same number of row as
        `Fixed_Displacement_Coordinates`.

On the nodes may also be applied some load. Therefore following two datasets
are optional:

-   `Loaded_Nodes_Coordinates`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_U16LE`
    -   Size: (k, 4)
    -   Description: This datasets is optional. It describes which nodes
        have load.  The first 3 values are the coordinate of the boundary
        nodes. The fourth value describes the direction which is fixed
        (`0 = x`, `1 = y`, `2 = z`).

-   `Loaded_Nodes_Values`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
    -   Size: n
    -   Description: This dataset is optional. It is strongly related
        to `Loaded_Nodes_Coordinates`. `Loaded_Nodes_Coordinates` stores
        the position and the direction of the loaded nodes and this dataset
        saves their load. This dataset must have the same number of row as
        `Loaded_Nodes_Coordinates`.

## Output file format ##

ParOSol writes the solution and the mesh. The mesh is needed to
visualize the solution. The solution and the mesh are two different
group of datasets. The `Mesh` group contains following datasets:

-   `Coordinates`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
    -   Size: (n,3)
    -   Description: This dataset holds the Coordinates of the vertices.

-   `Elements`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_I64LE`
    -   Size: (m,8)
    -   Description: This dataset stores the 8 indices of the adjacency nodes
        of an element.

-   `Emoduli`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F32LE`
    -   Size: (m,1)
    -   Description: This dataset stores for each element the Young’s modulus.

The results and some post processing values are stored in the group
`Solution`:

-   `disp`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F64LE`
    -   Size: (n,3)
    -   Description: Displacement in each node.

-   `force`
    -   Type: `H5T_IEEE_F64LE`
    -   Size: (n,3)
    -   Description: Force in each node.

-   `SED`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_F64LE`
    -   Size: (m,1)
    -   Description: Strain Energy Density. It is computed at the center of
        the elements.

-   `VonMises`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_F64LE`
    -   Size: (m,1)
    -   Description: Von Mises Stress. It is computed at the center of the
        elements.

-   `EFF`
    -   Type: `H5T_STD_F64LE`
    -   Size: (m,1)
    -   Description: Effective strain. It is computed at the center of the
        elements.
